------------------------------------------------------------------------
CS322 Languages and Compiler Design II                        Homework 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[This homework assignment is due at the start of class on Tue, Jan 26
on paper, or by by noon that same day if you submit by email.  Please be
sure to follow the guidelines for homework submission on the class web
page (and make sure that you familiarize yourself with those guidelines
well ahead of the deadline), especially if you are planning to submit
via email.

This homework is intended to familiarize you with the use of IA32
assembly language.  You should complete this exercise using the AT&T
syntax; even if you know the "Intel syntax", you should not use it here
because that won't help you to develop familiarity with the notation
that I am using in class.  Also note that I am not expecting any
previous experience with assembly language programming, or with special
IA32 instructions; you should be able to complete this homework using
only the IA32 instructions that I have shown in class.  If you feel
tempted to use additional instructions that you know already, or if
find something in Intel documentation that looks useful but wasn't
covered in class, check with me before using it.  Treat this as if you
are working for a company that has very strict (and narrow) coding
guidelines when it comes to x86 programming!

The inspiration for this particular set of exercises came from
thinking about simple kinds of image processing.  In fact, one common
reason for using assembly language programming in real applications,
even if most of the code is written in a higher level language, is to
implement image, video, or audio processing functions: this may be
necessary to produce code that can run quickly, handle large amounts
of data, or use special "multimedia" CPU instructions that are only
available in assembly code.  Of course, the images that we work with
here are much simpler and much smaller than you'll find in a real
program, but I'm hoping you'll still enjoy working on these problems.

More specifically, for the purposes of this exercise, we're going to
assume that an image of width w and height h is represented by a
contiguous block of (2 + h*w) 32-bit (4 byte) values in memory.  The
first two entries in the table are used to store the width and the
height of the image, followed by the data for the first row (a
sequence of w words), then the data for the second row (another
sequence of w words), and so on for each of the h rows.  In a real
image processing application, the data for each pixel would likely
be a value representing some specific color data.  For the purposes
of this exercise, however, we will just store a single character
value for each pixel.  So, for example, the following sequence of
32-bit words:

  3, 2, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70
 
represents a 2 row, 3 column "image" that looks something like
the following:

  ABC
  DEF

(In case you don't already known, 65 is the numeric code for the
letter "A", 66 is the code for "B", etc...)

For each of the following tasks, you are asked to write a fragment of
IA32 code that takes the starting addresses of two images, represented
as above, in the esi and edi registers as its input and returns a
single integer as its result in eax.

The six specific programs that you should implement for this homework
assignment are as follows:

Program 1: The result should be the total number of "pixels" in the
           two input images.  The images themselves should not be
           modified.  The total number of pixels in a single image,
           of course, is just the width of the image multiplied by
           the height.

Program 2: The result should be the total number of spaces in the
           first input image.  (In case you don't know, the numeric
           code for a space character is 32).  Again, neither of the
           images should be modified by this operation.

Program 3: The result should be 1 and the first image should be
           rotated through 180 degrees without modifying the second
           image.  [Hint: think what happens when you reverse the
           order of the pixels in the array ...]
  
Program 4: If the two input images have the same width and height,
           then the result should be the integer 42 and every
           "pixel" in both images should be replaced with the
           character "*".  (And again, in case you don't know, the
           numeric code for the * character is also 42!)

Program 5: If the two input images have the same width and height,
           then the result should be 1 and the first image should
           be overwritten with a copy of the second image.

Program 6: If the two input images have the same width and height,
	   then the first image should be modified to contain a
	   "merged" version of the two images.  Each pixel in the
	   modified image will be the same as the corresponding pixel
	   in either the first or the second image; the pixel from the
	   first image will only be used if the pixel from the second
	   image is a space.   For example, given the following pair
	   of images:

               abcdef          A CD F
               ghijkl   and     H  K 
               mnopqr          M OP R

           then the first image would be modified to contain:

               AbCDeF
               gHijKl
               MnOPqR

	   In addition, the final output (in eax) should contain the
	   number of characters/pixels that have been copied across
	   from the second image (i.e., the number of non-space
	   characters in the second image).  For the example above,
	   the final result would be 10.

Note that, in Programs 4-6, if the images have different sizes, then
the result should be zero and neither image should be modified.

For those of you that enjoy this kind of puzzle, even if it isn't going
to earn you any extra credit now, here's one further (optional, not for
credit) challenge for you:

Program 7: If the two inputs are square images with the same width and
           height, then the first image should be replaced with a copy
           of the second that has been rotated through 90 degrees clockwise.

Specific instructions for developing and testing your solutions on the
computer (which is required to obtain full credit) are provided as part
of the materials that you can download from the class web page.  Those
materials include instructions for building a test framework on several
different platforms (see the README file), as well as a set of examples
of assembly language programming (see the examples subdirectory).

And, of course, please ask (on the mailing list, during office hours,
in class, in person, ...) if you get stuck and need further help or
clarification!

------------------------------------------------------------------------
